v24.2.4 release notes (#19023)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v24.2/v24.2.4.md

## v24.2.4

Release Date: October 17, 2024

> {% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% include releases/new-release-downloads-docker-image.md release=include.release %}

```
I have reported this to the Tools team. It can cause some display issues depending on what comes after the include.

  These metrics track the number of bytes sent by individual [changefeeds]({% link v24.2/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) to the following sinks: 
	- [Kafka sinks]({% link v24.2/changefeed-sinks.md %}#kafka). If [child metrics are enabled]({% link v24.2/cluster-settings.md %}#setting-server-child-metrics-enabled), the metric will have a `kafka` label. 
	- [Webhook sinks]({% link v24.2/changefeed-sinks.md %}#webhook-sink). If child metrics are enabled, the metric will have a `webhook` label. 
	- [Pub/Sub sinks]({% link v24.2/changefeed-sinks.md %}#google-cloud-pub-sub). If child metrics are enabled, the metric will have a `pubsub` label. 
	- [SQL sink]({% link v24.2/changefeed-for.md %}). If child metrics are enabled, the metric will have a `sql` label.
- Added a `changefeed.total_ranges` metric that can be used to monitor the number of ranges that are watched by [changefeed]({% link v24.2/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) aggregators. It shares the same polling interval as `changefeed.lagging_ranges`, which is controlled by the existing `lagging_ranges_polling_interval` option. [#130982][#130982]

> - Disambiguated [metrics]({% link v24.2/essential-metrics-self-hosted.md %}) and [logs]({% link v24.2/logging-overview.md %}) for the two buffers used by the KV feed. The following metrics now have a suffix indicating which buffer they correspond to: `changefeed.buffer_entries.*`, `changefeed.buffer_entries_mem.*`, or `changefeed.buffer_pushback_nanos.*`. The old versions are retained for backward compatibility, though using the new format is recommended. [#131419][#131419]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Disambiguated [metrics]({% link v24.2/essential-metrics-self-hosted.md %}) and [logs]({% link v24.2/logging-overview.md %}) for the two buffers used by the KV feed. The following metrics now have a suffix indicating which buffer they correspond to: `changefeed.buffer_entries.*`, `changefeed.buffer_entries_mem.*`, or `changefeed.buffer_pushback_nanos.*`. The previous metric names are retained for backward compatibility. [#131419][#131419]
```

> - Added timers around key parts of the [changefeed]({% link v24.2/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) pipeline to help debug feeds experiencing issues. The `changefeed.stage.{stage}.latency` metrics now emit latency histograms for each stage. The metric respects the changefeed `scope` label for debugging specific feeds. [#131372][#131372]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added timers and corresponding [metrics]({% link v24.2/metrics.md %} for key parts of the [changefeed]({% link v24.2/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) pipeline to help debug issues with feeds. The `changefeed.stage.{stage}.latency` metrics now emit latency histograms for each stage. The metrics respect the changefeed `scope` label to debug a specific feed. [#131372][#131372]
```

<h3 id="v24-2-4-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

> - The [session variable]({% link v24.2/set-vars.md %}) `enforce_home_region_follower_reads_enabled` is now deprecated, and will be removed in a future release. The related session variable `enforce_home_region` remains supported and is not deprecated. [#129587][#129587]

Reviewer: Is it deprecated in favor of something else or just period?

Author: @michae2 Any thoughts/suggestions on this?

Author: TYVM

```suggestion
- The [session variable]({% link v24.2/set-vars.md %}) `enforce_home_region_follower_reads_enabled` is now deprecated, in favor of `enforce_home_region`. The deprecated variable will be removed in a future release. [#129587][#129587]
```

<h3 id="v24-2-4-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

> - Added a `ranges.decommissioning` [metric]({% link v24.2/metrics.md %}) representing the number of ranges that have a replica on a [decommissioning node]({% link v24.2/node-shutdown.md %}?filters=decommission). [#130247][#130247]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added the  new [metric]({% link v24.2/metrics.md %}) `ranges.decommissioning`  to show the number of ranges that have a replica on a [decommissioning node]({% link v24.2/node-shutdown.md %}?filters=decommission). [#130247][#130247]
```

- You can now configure the log format for the [`stderr` log sink]({% link v24.2/configure-logs.md %}#output-to-stderr) by setting the `stderr.format` field in the [YAML configuration]({% link v24.2/configure-logs.md %}#yaml-payload). [#131539][#131539]

<h3 id="v24-2-4-db-console-changes">DB Console changes</h3>

- Streamlined [metric chart]({% link v24.2/ui-overview.md %}#metrics) legends by removing the name of the chart from labels, where it was an identical prefix for all labels on the chart. [#129359][#129359]

> - The [DB Console]({% link v24.2/ui-overview.md %}) now shows a notification alerting customers without an [Enterprise license]({% link v24.2/enterprise-licensing.md %}) to [upcoming license changes](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/enterprise-license-update/) with a link to more information. [#130417][#130417]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The [DB Console]({% link v24.2/ui-overview.md %}) now shows a notification if the cluster has no [Enterprise license]({% link v24.2/enterprise-licensing.md %}) set. Refer to [upcoming license changes](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/enterprise-license-update/) for more information. [#130417][#130417]
```

<h3 id="v24-2-4-bug-fixes">Bug fixes</h3>

> - Addressed a bug in the [upgrade]({% link v24.2/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}) pre-condition for repairing descriptor corruption, which could lead to upgrade finalization being stuck. [#130517][#130517]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that that could prevent [upgrade finalization]({% link v24.2/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}) to v23.2  during the migration that detects and repairs corrupt descriptors. [#130517][#130517]
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that could prevent [upgrade finalization]({% link v24.2/upgrade-cockroach-version.md %}) when attempting to resolve a large number of corrupt descriptors. [#130517][#130517]
```

- Fixed a bug that caused the [optimizer]({% link v24.2/cost-based-optimizer.md %}) to plan unnecessary post-query uniqueness checks during [`INSERT`]({% link v24.2/insert.md %}), [`UPSERT`]({% link v24.2/upsert.md %}), and [`UPDATE`]({% link v24.2/update.md %}) statements on tables with [partial]({% link v24.2/partial-indexes.md %}), [unique]({% link v24.2/create-index.md %}#unique-indexes) [hash-sharded indexes]({% link v24.2/hash-sharded-indexes.md %}). These unnecessary checks added overhead to execution of these statements, and caused the statements to error when executed under [`READ COMMITTED`]({% link v24.2/read-committed.md %}) isolation. [#130570][#130570]
- Fixed a bug that could result in the inability to garbage collect an [MVCC]({% link v24.2/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#mvcc) range tombstone within a [global table]({% link v24.2/global-tables.md %}). [#130940][#130940]

> - Previously, if a connection was attempting a [schema change]({% link v24.2/online-schema-changes.md %}) while the same schema objects were being dropped, it was possible for the connection to be incorrectly dropped. This is now fixed. [#130962][#130962]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where a connection could be dropped if the client was attempting a [schema change]({% link v24.2/online-schema-changes.md %}) while the same schema objects were being dropped, it was possible for the connection to be incorrectly dropped. [#130962][#130962]
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where a connection could be dropped if the client was attempting a [schema change]({% link v24.2/online-schema-changes.md %}) while the same schema objects were being dropped. [#130962][#130962]
```

I think this was your intended edit. LGTM

> - Previously, CockroachDB could incorrectly evaluate the [`IS NOT NULL`]({% link v24.2/null-handling.md %}#nulls-and-simple-comparisons) when applied to tuples containing NULL elements (e.g., `(1, NULL)` or `(NULL, NULL)`). This issue, which has existed since version 20.2, has now been resolved to ensure that only fully non-NULL tuples pass the filter. [#130947][#130947]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v20.2 where the [`IS NOT NULL`]({% link v24.2/null-handling.md %}#nulls-and-simple-comparisons)  clause was not correctly evaluated when when applied to tuples containing `NULL` elements, such as `(1, NULL)` or `(NULL, NULL)`. [#130947][#130947]
```
Parenthetical phrase is not ideal here where parentheses are significant in the code block.

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v23.2 where the [`IS NOT NULL`]({% link v24.2/null-handling.md %}#nulls-and-simple-comparisons) clause would incorrectly allow tuples containing NULL elements, e.g. `(1, NULL)` or `(NULL, NULL)`. [#130947][#130947]
```

> - Fixed a bug that could cause errors with the message `internal error: Non-nullable column ...` when executing statements under [`READ COMMITTED`]({% link v24.2/read-committed.md %}) isolation that involved tables with [`NOT NULL`]({% link v24.2/not-null.md %}) virtual columns. [#131019][#131019]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that could cause errors with the message `internal error: Non-nullable column ...` when executing statements under [`READ COMMITTED`]({% link v24.2/read-committed.md %}) isolation that involved tables with [`NOT NULL`]({% link v24.2/not-null.md %}) [virtual columns]({% link v24.2/virtual.md %}. [#131019][#131019]
```

> - The AWS endpoint and cloud custom HTTP client configuration are now considered when [implicit authentication]({% link v24.2/cloud-storage-authentication.md %}) is used for cloud storage. Previously, these were only considered when using explicit credentials. [#131173][#131173]

Reviewer: I have the same note in v23.2.13 and here is my edit. Which do you prefer?

```
- Fixed a bug where [AWS S3 and HTTP client configurations]({% link v23.2/cloud-storage.md %}) were not considered when implicit authentication was used. [#131201][#131201]
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where [AWS S3 and HTTP client configurations]({% link v24.2/cloud-storage.md %}) were not considered when implicit authentication was used. [#131173][#131173]
```

> - Fixed a bug that could cause incorrect results for queries containing a correlated subquery with a [`GROUP BY`]({% link v24.2/select-clause.md %}#create-aggregate-groups) or [`DISTINCT ON`]({% link v24.2/select-clause.md %}#eliminate-duplicate-rows) operator referencing an outer column. This issue would occur if the correlated subquery was in the input of a [`SELECT`]({% link v24.2/select-clause.md %}) or [`JOIN`]({% link v24.2/joins.md %}) operator that had a filter equating the outer-column reference to a non-outer column in the grouping operator's input, while the grouping column set did not include the replacement column but functionally determined it. This bug was introduced in v23.1. [#130990][#130990]

Reviewer: Here's my edit. Which do you prefer? 

```
- Fixed a bug introduced in v23.1 that can cause incorrect results in the following scenario:
    1. The query contains a correlated subquery.
    1. The correlated subquery has a `GroupBy` or `DistinctOn` operator with an outer-column reference in its input.
    1. The correlated subquery is in the input of a `SELECT` or `JOIN` clause that has a filter that sets the outer-column reference equal to an inner column that is in the input of the grouping operator.
    1. The set of grouping columns does not include the replacement column explicitly.

    [#130988][#130988]
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v23.1 that can cause incorrect query results under the following conditions:
    1. The query contains a correlated subquery.
    1. The correlated subquery has a `GroupBy` or `DistinctOn` operator with an outer-column reference in its input.
    1. The correlated subquery is in the input of a `SELECT` or `JOIN` clause that has a filter that sets the outer-column reference equal to an inner column that is in the input of the grouping operator.
    1. The set of grouping columns does not include the replacement column explicitly.

    [#130990][#130990]
```

> - Fixed a bug where jobs created in sessions with non-zero session timezone offsets could hang before starting or report incorrect creation times when viewed in [`SHOW JOBS`]({% link v24.2/show-jobs.md %}) and the [DB Console]({% link v24.2/ui-overview.md %}). [#131407][#131407]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug where jobs created in a session with a timezone offset configured could fail to start or could report an incorrect creation time in the output of [`SHOW JOBS`]({% link v24.2/show-jobs.md %}) and in the [DB Console]({% link v24.2/ui-overview.md %}). [#131407][#131407]
```

> - Fixed a bug that could prevent a [changefeed]({% link v24.2/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) from being able to resume after being paused for a prolonged period of time. [#130921][#130921]

Reviewer: Here is my edit:

```
- Fixed a bug that could prevent a [changefeed]({% link v23.2/use-changefeeds.md %}) from resuming from a prolonged paused state. [#130919][#130919]
```

Author: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug that could prevent a [changefeed]({% link v23.2/use-changefeeds.md %}) from resuming after a prolonged paused state. [#130921][#130921]
```

<h3 id="v24-2-4-performance-improvements">Performance improvements</h3>

- The [query optimizer]({% link v24.2/cost-based-optimizer.md %}) now plans limited [partial index]({% link v24.2/partial-indexes.md %}) scans in more cases when the new [session variable]({% link v24.2/session-variables.md %}) `optimizer_push_limit_into_project_filtered_scan` is set to `on`. [#130335][#130335]

> - Reduce the write-amplification impact of rebalances by splitting snapshot [SST files]({% link v24.2/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#pebble) into smaller ones before ingesting them into [Pebble]({% link v24.2/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#ssts). [#128997][#128997]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reduced the write-amplification impact of rebalances by splitting snapshot [SST files]({% link v24.2/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#pebble) before ingesting them into [Pebble]({% link v24.2/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#ssts). [#128997][#128997]
```

[#130935]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/130935
[#130940]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/130940
[#130947]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/130947
[#130962]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/130962
[#130982]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/130982
[#130990]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/130990
[#131019]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131019
[#131173]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131173
[#131199]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131199
[#131210]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131210
[#131239]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131239
[#131311]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131311
[#131372]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131372
[#131391]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131391
[#131407]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131407
[#131419]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131419
[#131539]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131539
[#131619]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/131619

> [04c161f65]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/04c161f65
> [1d9dc95b8]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/1d9dc95b8
> [38ed1228f]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/38ed1228f
> [a8c4f088d]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/a8c4f088d
> [a94db30fe]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/a94db30fe
> [d3e7855c7]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/d3e7855c7
> [e5e2b273f]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/e5e2b273f

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Disambiguated [metrics]({% link v24.2/essential-metrics-self-hosted.md %}) and [logs]({% link v24.2/logging-overview.md %}) for the two buffers used by the KV feed. The following metrics now have a suffix indicating which buffer they correspond to: `changefeed.buffer_entries.*`, `changefeed.buffer_entries_mem.*`, or `changefeed.buffer_pushback_nanos.*`. The previous metric names are retained for backward compatibility. [#131419][#131419]
- Added timers and corresponding [metrics]({% link v24.2/metrics.md %} for key parts of the [changefeed]({% link v24.2/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) pipeline to help debug issues with feeds. The `changefeed.stage.{stage}.latency` metrics now emit latency histograms for each stage. The metrics respect the changefeed `scope` label to debug a specific feed. [#131372][#131372]

<h3 id="v24-2-4-sql-language-changes">SQL language changes</h3>

- The [session variable]({% link v24.2/set-vars.md %}) `enforce_home_region_follower_reads_enabled` is now deprecated, in favor of `enforce_home_region`. The deprecated variable will be removed in a future release. [#129587][#129587]

<h3 id="v24-2-4-operational-changes">Operational changes</h3>

> - Added the  new [metric]({% link v24.2/metrics.md %}) `ranges.decommissioning`  to show the number of ranges that have a replica on a [decommissioning node]({% link v24.2/node-shutdown.md %}?filters=decommission). [#130247][#130247]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added the new [metric]({% link v24.2/metrics.md %}) `ranges.decommissioning`  to show the number of ranges that have a replica on a [decommissioning node]({% link v24.2/node-shutdown.md %}?filters=decommission). [#130247][#130247]
```

- Fixed a bug that caused the [optimizer]({% link v24.2/cost-based-optimizer.md %}) to plan unnecessary post-query uniqueness checks during [`INSERT`]({% link v24.2/insert.md %}), [`UPSERT`]({% link v24.2/upsert.md %}), and [`UPDATE`]({% link v24.2/update.md %}) statements on tables with [partial]({% link v24.2/partial-indexes.md %}), [unique]({% link v24.2/create-index.md %}#unique-indexes) [hash-sharded indexes]({% link v24.2/hash-sharded-indexes.md %}). These unnecessary checks added overhead to execution of these statements, and caused the statements to error when executed under [`READ COMMITTED`]({% link v24.2/read-committed.md %}) isolation. [#130570][#130570]
- Fixed a bug that could result in the inability to garbage collect an [MVCC]({% link v24.2/architecture/storage-layer.md %}#mvcc) range tombstone within a [global table]({% link v24.2/global-tables.md %}). [#130940][#130940]
- Fixed a bug where a connection could be dropped if the client was attempting a [schema change]({% link v24.2/online-schema-changes.md %}) while the same schema objects were being dropped. [#130962][#130962]

> - Fixed a bug introduced in v23.2 where the [`IS NOT NULL`]({% link v24.2/null-handling.md %}#nulls-and-simple-comparisons) clause would incorrectly allow tuples containing NULL elements, e.g. `(1, NULL)` or `(NULL, NULL)`. [#130947][#130947]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed a bug introduced in v23.2 where the [`IS NOT NULL`]({% link v24.2/null-handling.md %}#nulls-and-simple-comparisons) clause would incorrectly allow tuples containing `NULL` elements, e.g. `(1, NULL)` or `(NULL, NULL)`. [#130947][#130947]
```
